# Author's Preface

THE author desires to express a sense of deep obligation for the help he has received from many sources in compiling this Manual.

First and foremost, to the Rev. T. T. Carter, Hon. Canon of Christ Church, and Warden of the House of Mercy, Clewer, to whose suggestion the work owes its existence, and who has shewn unceasing interest in its compilation, revising the whole manuscript, and making valuable corrections and numerous additions: to the Rev. William Bright, D.D., Canon of Christ Church, and Regius Professor of Ecclesiastical History in the University of Oxford, to whom the Synopsis of the work was submitted, and who, later, most kindly examined the historical matter of the Second Part of the work, making corrections and suggestions of which the author has availed himself: to the Rev. Charles Bodington, Canon of Lichfield, and Diocesan Missioner, to whom the whole work has been submitted, and whose large experience in dealing with the special class of persons for whom this Manual is primarily intended, and whose patient labour in revising and adding much important matter, has made such aid doubly valuable: to the Rev. W. H. Hutchings, Rector of Kirby Misperton, for an examination of the first portion of the chapter treating of the Sacraments: to the Rev. George Seignelay Cuthbert, Sub-warden of the House of Mercy, Clewer, for many useful suggestions: to the Rev. F. W. Puller, of the Society of St. John the Evangelist, Cowley, who, most kindly, thoroughly revised the chapter treating of the Grades amongst the Bishops of the Church, a subject which he has made specially his own: to the Rev. George Sowden, Hon. Canon of Wakefield, for permission to reprint the Notes on the Church Offices, with slight alterations: to the Council of the Church House, who have so courteously permitted a reproduction of the design of the Seal of that Institution: to Mr. George Richmond, R.A., and to the London Autotype Co. for permission to copy Mr. Dyce's drawing of Archbishop Parker's consecration: and lastly to a kind friend who has bestowed great labour in preparing the MS. for the press. The author begs to thank the many friends who have subscribed to allow of the insertion of the illustrations, without adding to the cost of the publication.

In reference to the Second Part of the Book, the author wishes to say that it is not intended to give a full account of the history of the English Church, but only a general outline, whereby the reader may be able to see how things have come to be as they are.

In the necessary treatment of matters of controversy, he desires to withdraw any word which may be lacking either in charity, or in perfect fairness.

Clewer, July 1, 1893.
